# calcofi


  For our project we are working with California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI), a research organization studying and protecting the environment off the California Coast. The organization has been collecting data on oceanic properties (involving physical, chemical, and biological data) like temperature, salinity, oxygen, and pH down to a depth of about 500 meters for the past seventy four years. CalCOFI measures these properties by conducting cruises out to stations throughout 500 miles of the coastline and 360 miles offshore. 
  
  Observations made by CalCOFI’s data collection program reflect that the dissolved oxygen (hypoxia) and pH levels in the ocean off the coast of California have been varying greatly over the past few decades. It is increasingly recognized that low dissolved oxygen and low pH conditions have detritus effects on marine organisms. These phenomena occur naturally in certain coastal environments and can be applied by the effects of climate change and global warming. Thus, our project is focused on conducting exploratory analysis to characterize the regions of the ocean off the coast of California in which ocean acidification and hypoxia vary to dangerous levels and thus where marine life may be more susceptible to climate change. Our goal is to present our analytical findings through easily digestible visualizations and animations to help policy makers understand where local interventions need to be implemented and what those interventions would need to address.
  
  Our team is currently trying out a multitude of programs to visualize our data regarding hypoxia in the Pacific Ocean off of the California coast. Our main objective is to see at which depths and locations off the coast have the most variability in milliliters of oxygen per liter and overall the least amount of oxygen concentration. We are using different visualization packages in R to best show the data we want to present.